introduce new shared state chapter (#88)
webxdc/webxdc_docs: src/shared_state/conflicts.md

If Alice and Bob both tried to repeatedly set the description for a group, it might play out like so:

1. Alejo sets the description using a message (A) with an id `0`
2. Binita receives this message, but wants to correct a typo, so she sends an update (B) with id `1`. Alejo can determine that this was sent and received in the right order, so this should supercede his own description rather than be treated as a conflict
3. They both decide to add some emojis to the description, and do so in parallel (messages C and D), but with different emojis. Each believes their message to correctly have the id `2`
4. Before either of the previous messages have been delivered, Binita sends one more update (E) to add another emoji using id `3`
5. Alejo and Binita receive each others' messages:
    * because C and D both have id `2`, Binita can conclude that Alejo was not aware of her message when he authored his
    * Alejo can conclude the same of Binita's D, but cannot determine whether she was aware of his C when she sent E. Because of this uncertainty, they should both treat these messages as having been authored concurrently, resulting in a conflict

> 6. Alejo decides to resolve this conflict, authoring a new description which includes the corrected typo and all emojis added by either of them. When Binita receives it will have clearly been sent after both C and E

Reviewer: `When Binita receives it will..` maybe change to `When Binita receives it, it will..`

It is somewhat ambiguous about exactly which messages have been received, however, it remains very effective in systems that require a high number of messages with minimal overhead.
For these reasons, it is used by [Yjs](https://yjs.dev/), which will be discussed later in this chapter.

Another popular approach which is more explicit but less compact involves the use of [cryptographic hash functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function).
Instead of a single counter, a list of hashes of the preceding messages which were known at the time the message was authored.
This makes it possible to detect when a message has not been delivered or if message history has somehow been altered (although the latter probably isn't a concern with webxdc apps).
Variations of this technique are applied in [Git](https://git-scm.com/), [BitTorrent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BitTorrent),
[Matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_(protocol)), [Secure Scuttlebutt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Scuttlebutt),
[IPFS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InterPlanetary_File_System), and many other protocols intended to solve a variety of problems.

> 

Reviewer: Not mentioning blockchains like bitcoin on purpose? It's a good example of chaining blocks together with a hash pointing to the previous block. But no biggie if left out.

Author: I had mentioned it during some intermediary version, but I may have accidentally dropped it when shuffling some content around

# Detecting conflicts

Modifications to shared state can be considered conflicting when two conditions are met:

1. They affect an overlapping section of a data structure, such as if two users both try to set the title of the same todo-list item

2. They are [concurrent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concurrency_(computer_science)) - meaning that the participants in the system cannot conclusively determine the order in which they occurred

_Concurrent updates which affect unrelated data_ can be resolved without issue, as can _sequential updates to related data_.

> Concurrency can effectively be ignored from a client's perspective in schemes that use a central server as a single source of truth.
> In practice one message will always arrive slightly before another, and even if they were truly simultaneous the server could arrange them into an arbitrary order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

# Detecting conflicts

Modifications to shared state can be considered conflicting when two conditions are met:

1. They affect an overlapping section of a data structure, such as if two users both try to set the title of the same todo-list item

2. They are [concurrent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concurrency_(computer_science)) - meaning that the participants in the system cannot conclusively determine the order in which they occurred

_Concurrent updates which affect unrelated data_ can be resolved without issue, as can _sequential updates to related data_.

Concurrency can effectively be ignored from a client's perspective in schemes that use a central server as a single source of truth.
In practice one message will always arrive slightly before another, and even if they were truly simultaneous the server could arrange them into an arbitrary order.

> Because this can be done for all messages, all updates can be said to have a [total order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_order), which makes it possible for all clients to compute the same results when they are applied sequentially.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Concurrency can effectively be ignored from a client's perspective in schemes that use a central server with online clients.  Centralized web apps using an always online central HTTP server are a popular example of this model.  Centralized HTTP servers can not only guarantee a [total order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_order) of messages but they can also authoritatively resolve conflicts and provide the single "source for truth" for all associated web apps running on their client devices.  In a decentralized messaging model, and in particular with end-to-end encrypted messaging, both a Total Order of messages and a "single source of truth" can not be assumed. ``

## Conflict resolution in webxdc applications

> Many webxdc applications are incapable of producing conflicts, either because they do not use the network communication APIs, or because any given data structure can only have one writer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many webxdc applications are incapable of producing conflicts, either because they do not use the network communication APIs, or because any given data structure can only have one writer.  For example, many of the available [webxdc games](https://webxdc.org/apps/) offer a high-score table and how users scored will typically be reported back to the chat. Such a gaming app will simply post their user's highscore and everybody will collect all arriving highscore data and show it to their users in a sorted list. There is hardly any problem if a message is lost or messages get re-ordered.  Eventually everybody will see roughly the same highscore list. 
```

> It is worth considering that the webxdc host application might permit a single user to use multiple devices,
> though it is ultimately up to an app's developers whether they want to support such use-cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is worth considering that the webxdc host application might permit a single user to use multiple devices. For example, a password-manager webxdc app could be used in a "Saved Messages" or "Self-messages" chat so that only a single user's devices will share the application state.  Such a multi-device setting already constitutes a minimal P2P system where total message ordering can not be guaranteed and there is no single source of truth.  
```

> For applications that permit multiple devices to update the same values using [`webxdc.sendUpdate()`](../spec/sendUpdate.html#sendupdate) it is necessary to provide some mechanism through which all clients can determine a total order for all updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Webxdc applications can use [`webxdc.sendUpdate()`](../spec/sendUpdate.html#sendupdate) and [`setUpdateListener`](https://docs.webxdc.org/spec/setUpdateListener.html) to send and receive data to and from other devices. It then is necessary to provide some mechanism through which all clients can determine a total order for all updates, or can otherwise arrive at a shared consistent view on different devices, once all messages have been delivered.   
```

This makes it possible to detect when a message has not been delivered or if message history has somehow been altered (although the latter probably isn't a concern with webxdc apps).
Variations of this technique are applied in [Git](https://git-scm.com/), [BitTorrent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BitTorrent),
[Bitcoin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin),
[Matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_(protocol)), [Secure Scuttlebutt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Scuttlebutt),
[IPFS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InterPlanetary_File_System), and many other protocols intended to solve a variety of problems.

Either of these general techniques convey a notion of _causality_.
Techniques to resolve conflicts can be computationally expensive, or can require manual human intervention.
Tracking causality and ruling out conflicts are an effective first line of defense in peer-to-peer systems where messages are not guaranteed to be ordered.

With the knowledge of how conflicts can occur in distributed systems,
and some basic techniques to reduce their frequency,

> we can now move on and introduce a technology designed to eliminate them entirely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we can now move on and introduce an evolving technology designed to eliminate them entirely.
```
